#+title: Notebook of a Return to My Native Land - part 5
#+author: Marco Craveiro
#+options: num:nil author:nil toc:nil
#+bind: org-html-validation-link nil
#+HTML_HEAD: <link rel="stylesheet" href="../css/tufte.css" type="text/css" />

[[file:index.org][Back to chapter index.]]

Tuesday, December 12, 2006

Angolan Red Tape

While I was moaning about our lovely Angola, my cousin Elsa sent me
the following reply, which I found so enlightening I just had to share
with everyone. My translation does not do justice to the original, so
I've attached her email below. For the non-portuguese, a "bridge"
happens when a national holiday falls on a Tuesday or a Thursday, and
basically means that people don't turn up to work on the Monday or
Friday. A holiday on a Wednesday may also result in a two day
bridge...

#+begin_quote
I would like to placate your despair somewhat as I will be joining you
soon on the battle against Angolan red tape. On top of my to-do list,
as soon as I reach our beloved motherland, is to renew my ID card and
passport! I started doing the usual prayers, since one has to exclude
Fridays (which, of course are reserved as weekend preparation), the
Mondays that follow Friday holidays, the bridges that follow the
previous' week's mid-week holidays, the preparation for Christmas and
New Year, etc... And we still have to pray that there are no rainy
days, days in which it is impossible to have any functioning public
services (the imaginary quote "Rain is the number one enemy of public
work" will one day be said by an eminent Angolan authority, who has to
sort out her paperwork); Mental note for any wannabe-users of the
Angolan public services: Angola is the number one country in the WORLD
when it comes to the sheer number of national holidays! And rain is
the number two national catastrophe – number one is of course lack of
that item essential for the survival of any Angolan, "birra", also
known as beer... True, we are not quite yet in the rainy season but we
all know that the most unexpected events always happen when you need
to sort things out... That's how it goes... Contingency plan? We
haven't got one yet but probably - as a person who can choose between
the best of both worlds - I'll get an Angolan visa on my Portuguese
passport, just so that, god forbid, if I can't get my Angolan
documents sorted out in time, I'll at least get out of the country in
time to celebrate Easter with the family... Well... If it does rain I
might as well forget about sorting out the passport and the ID card;
at least, as a consolation, there's nothing in the world that quite
compares to the smell of red earth wet with the worm rain...
#+end_quote

Original:

#+begin_quote
Só queria minorar o vosso desespero juntando-me à vossa batalha pelo
ultrapassar das angustias de combater a burocracia angolana
partilhando com vocês a noticia de que no topo da minha lista dos
afazeres assim que pisar o solo da pátria é renovar o BI e o
passaporte! já comecei as minhas rezas uma vez que tirando as sextas
feiras que são, claro, de preparação para o fds, as segundas seguidas
de fds em que a sexta

foi feriado, as pontes a seguir aos feriados a meio da semana,
preparação para as festas do natal e ano novo, etc... ainda temos de
rezar para que não haja dias de chuva, dias em que se torna impossível
ter algum serviço público funcional ( "a chuva é o inimigo nº1 do
funcionalismo publico" , não disse, mas diria qualquer erudito
angolano que tivesse duas semanas para tratar da sua identidade
caducada algures em meados de 2001); Nota para futuros utilizadores do
aparelho estatal angolano: Angola é o país com mais feriados nacionais
do MUNDO!!!! A chuva é a 1ª catástrofe nacional a seguir à falta do
bem essencial para a sobrevivência de qualquer angolano que se preze,
a "birra", vulga cerveja... é claro que não estamos propriamente na
altura das chuvas, mas por experiência própria há alguma coisa que não
aconteça quando realmente precisamos de alguma coisa? Pois é... O
plano de contingência? Ainda não há, mas provavelmente como detentora
do melhor de dois mundos terei de apor um visto angolano no meu
passaporte português, para que, caso não consiga documentos angolanos
em tempo útil, possa pelo menos sair do país a tempo de festejar a
Páscoa com a família... Bem... resta o consolo de que se realmente
chover posso não ter nem BI nem passaporte, mas não existe nada que se
compare ao cheiro da terra vermelha molhada pela chuva quente...
#+end_quote

** The Eye of the Storm

The last few days in London were rather convoluted. Many, many things
happened in those ten or so days. It felt pretty much as if we were
riding a high-speed roller-coaster, and the only way to stay on was to
work till exhaustion. The daily routine involved waking up around
eight in the morning, doing endless chores and going to sleep around
one or so in the morning. Of course, this being us - renowned for our
sleeping ability - occasionally we had to take some time for a siesta
in the afternoon. But mostly we worked.

I just recall these days as one big blur.

On hindsight, my decision of leaving work so late was not a win. At
the time, things looked pretty much under control at home so when the
guys asked me to stay for a bit longer I didn't think twice. Work was
in a bit of a state and I wanted to leave things in order. However,
Shahin and I underestimated the amount of things that needed to be
done at the end. This was to some extent because we were basing
ourselves on Shahin's travelling experiences with Chris and Sham,
which gave us a great baseline for organisation. After all, they are
the most organised people we know. What we didn't realise at the time
was that we had four additional things that made matters more
complicated by several orders of magnitude: a) our visas were
difficult to obtain b) I was working all hours of the day c) we had a
company to sort out; and d) we were moving out of our flat.

I've already explained some of the fun we had getting the Angolan
visas. I must say all other visas were trivial to obtain; but we still
had to take two half-days to go to the Mozambique embassy, and this
was at a point where time was at a premium.

With regards to work, I was rather busy just before leaving. I was
chasing an annoying bug deep in the guts of the glue layer between the
analytics (quants) engine and the user interface. This bug proved to
be rather elusive, and it took all of my might plus some of Sushila's
to be able to track it down. We had to work some very long hours but
we did it in the end.

Sorting the company things also took its time. In particular going
through year end accounts at midnight after a very, very long day in a
very, very long week was not nice.

And we also had to buy the remaining items. These were not many, since
Shahin had been at it for three months, but there were still a few
scattered ones and they required trekking around London.

All these things pale in comparison to moving.

** Voortrekkers

The logistics of moving were daunting. Its hard to believe we actually
made it. We had to pack everything up we wanted to keep, bin
everything else or give it away, ship all the items to the four
"storage" locations provided by family (none within walking distance
of another or of our flat), clean the flat, sort out the closure of
all the utility bills, sort out the change of address, say goodbye to
as many friends and family as possible and many, many other things
that I have by now managed to erase from my brain. This was
exhausting.

We ended up doing several trips on public transport taking bits and
pieces because the cars we were going to use to move were not big
enough (conversely, one could say we had far too much stuff, but we'll
leave that to the discretion of the reader...). When things got
desperate, we used cabs as well. One of the highlights was the day
when took a load to my sister's house in North London early in the
morning (a fairly large load, it must be said), rested for
half-an-hour, went to the Mozambican embassy, got back to our flat and
left almost immediately to take a massive load (and I mean massive) to
Shahin's mom. On the train. We got back to the flat late, only to find
that there was still lots of stuff left to ship. The house just did
not want to empty itself. It was a Sisyphean task.

You have to understand, we didn't expect the move to be an issue. We
planned it well in advance. When we moved from Southampton we left
huge amounts of boxes at my sister's house and we gave away everything
we did not need. So it was a great surprise to find that we still had
so many things. "The more things you own, the more things own
you.". At this point, I was ready to take my vows and join a Buddhist
monastery. Getting rid of all the material things seemed like the only
thing to do. I suppose I had a bit of an epiphany: I suddenly realised
how hard it is to own absolutely nothing.

[[./marco_shahin_bethnal_green.jpg]]

In the midst of this delirious state, someway, somehow we managed to
get to a point were things could mostly fit in the two small
cars. This was just in the nick of time, as we had organised with Sham
and Mina to come and pick up the stuff on the Sunday. After some of
the usual heated discussions common to the Begum women - on which we
almost lost one of the cars - things got underway.

A special mention must be made to the efficiency of the inhabitants of
Bethnal Green, fondly known as the "Bethnal Green massive innit"
crew. We had a set of shelves, a desk and a chair, all in pretty good
condition. We were worried these items were going to end up in a
council dumpster somewhere, with so many people in need of good
furniture. None of our friends and family needed these items. We tried
to sell them or even give them away to local second hand shops, to no
avail. We even mentioned it to local shop owners, which were by now
our good friends, but nobody needed them. Just as we were
contemplating calling the council and organising a pick-up, Shahin
convinced us (us being me and Afaj) to leave it under the bridge and
see if anyone from the local council estate would want it. For those
who have seen Lord of War, the events that followed were almost
identical to the fast disassembling of an entire plane in the middle
of the African savanna. We had people around the goods in no time. In
fact, people were already there collecting things whilst we were
dropping off the rest. Some of the characters looked a little bit
shady and my ghetto-sense started tingling; we wouldn't want people
collecting things other than the ones we were giving away - in
particular the items which we were loading in the cars. But the
"massive" crew was law-abiding and all was well in the end.

Thanks to the help of Afaj, Chris, Sham and Mina we managed to get all
the goods to the Herts "storage" locations.

** Hello and Goodbye

Unfortunately, we didn't manage to say goodbye to most people. There
just wasn't enough hours in the day. I remember looking at my Google
calendar and seeing a sea of red and blue, appointments of all shapes
and sizes.

The only exceptions where those who invited themselves and came up to
our flat: Natalie, Stacey and Jay, JC, Nantha, Sam, Chris and Sham,
Afaj, Mina. Of course, we made sure they all packed and cleaned while
chatting; and they all left with as many things as they could possibly
take.

Everyone else will have to wait until summertime, unless we bump into
you on our travels.

** Exhaustion

On Wednesday, the day of our departure, we still had to take stuff to
my sister's house and clean the flat. We were thoroughly exhausted and
we had no thoughts in mind other than to rest. Somehow we managed to
sort out the flat and get the stuff to my sister's. But then, both the
buses and trains from North London to Heathrow were not
working. Incredible. We ended up taking a cab, which was just as well
with the amount of stuff we had on us.

We met up with Chris and Sham at the airport, sorted out last minute
details, including getting Sham and Chris to buy us an extra bag for
our tent and sleeping bags; we then had some food and were on our way.

On our way to deep sleep, that is.

[[file:part_6.org][Forward to next chapter]]
[[file:index.org][Back to chapter index.]]
