#+title: Notebook of a Return to My Native Land - part 6
#+author: Marco Craveiro
#+options: num:nil author:nil toc:nil
#+bind: org-html-validation-link nil
#+HTML_HEAD: <link rel="stylesheet" href="../css/tufte.css" type="text/css" />

[[file:index.org][Back to chapter index.]]

Wednesday, December 13, 2006

* Pinned to the Wall

Shahin wouldn't let me forget the PIN incident (or should I say
incidents...), which occurred just before we left. The words piss-up
and brewery come to mind. If you recall, we had struggled with our
friends at Abbey to get our beloved VISA card and its PIN and, as if
by magic, they managed to send everything through just as we were
leaving. What I conveniently forgot to tell you was that, when I went
to the ATM, I couldn't get the PIN to work. Tried it a couple of times
but no luck. So we went into the branch and complained. The woman
replied that quite a few customers had reported similar problems. We
cursed and abused Abbey for their inability to do the most trivial
tasks, requested a new PIN and thought nothing more about it.

A few days later, Shahin was desperately hunting for the new PIN she
had requested for her credit card. It was missing and we just could
not find it. She did find the letter where the PIN should have been,
but "somebody" had removed it. And the Abbey National PIN was still in
its pristine condition in the folder.

Yes, you guessed it right, I somehow confused the two PINs, used the
wrong one on the Abbey card, and figured it out after requesting a new
PIN. The pain, the pain. And, just to put the cherry on top, I lost my
credit card's PIN too.

In my defense, I stoically state that I never claimed any
organizational ability - other than perhaps with regards to source
code...

But, fear not, the desenrascanco Gods were still looking over their
favourite son: Maestro debit cards work fine in South-Africa and
Namibia. Just look for an ABSA (in South-Africa) and a Standard Bank
(in Namibia).

We'll worry about the rest later.

** Jozzie

After a rather uneventful ten-hour flight, we finally landed on
African soil on Thursday the 30th of December. We landed in
Johannesburg - Jo'burg or Jozzie, as the locals call it - in the OR
Tambo airport. The airport is on par to most European airports, if
perhaps somewhat smaller than the larger ones. As with a lot of
south-African infrastructure, the airport and its accesses are
currently being extended in preparation for the 2010 football (soccer)
World Cup. One thing we found pretty amazing about OR Tambo is that
there is a Muslim prayer area, clearly indicated by the information
signs.

Official entry into South-Africa is handled in an extremely efficient
fashion. The visa is stamped in the passport upon entry. This is a
single-entry visa, valid for 90 days. One thing to remember is to fill
in the entry form on the plane, declaring all the cash being brought
into the country. Note also that the form seems to imply you need to
declare any goods worth more than 3000 rand. This is not the case: you
should only declare items that you brought with the intention of
selling. And remember, any item you declare above this limit will be
subjected to a 20% VAT charge.

We were staying in Gemini Backpackers, in Crystal Gardens. They
organized the airport pickup. Apparently this is a must in Jo'burg and
it is not at all advised to just walk out of the airport and grab a
taxi. The ride took around thirty minutes in the hot, humid, thundery
weather. Unexpectedly, Jozzie is a very green city and its full of big
walled houses; it is one massive low-rise sprawl, with trees and
greenery everywhere. There are also lots of electric fences and barbed
wired, which at first look a bit menacing until one gets used to
it. On the whole, it is very pleasant to drive around: the traffic is
not bad for a big city, the roads are in very good condition and the
scenery is beautiful. There are quite a lot of people out and about -
but not huge amounts like one sees in poorer countries (Gambia springs
to mind). On the whole, the areas of Jozzie we drove through look like
a fairly posh London suburb, but with the white and Asian people
replaced by black people.

[[./joburg_traffic_lights.jpg]]

Interestingly enough Gemini is around the corner from the Alexandra
township, which is famous for all the wrong reasons. There were enough
ghetto-birds (police helicopters) flying around, at all hours of the
day. The sirens of the police cars and ambulances were also constant
company. However, I must say that, for us two
Bethnal-Green-Massif-Innit inhabitants, this soundtrack made us feel
right at home.

Gemini lodge is pleasant enough, very tidy and extremely green. There
is a nice but fading snooker table, at which I spent almost all my
waking hours, and a swimming pool, but the water of the pool is not
clean enough to swim (or maybe it has too much chlorine). This is a
common theme in most backpacker's lodges we've been to. They all have
swimming pools (with filters running and everything) but the water
never seems clean enough for swimming. I don't quite understand why
they bother to have the pool at all.

[[./gemini_backpackers.jpg]]

There are some significant differences between the African backpacker
and its Asian/Australian counterpart. First, there are lots of older
people, some in their fifties, some older. Sleeping in dorms and
all. Second, the younger crowd is not quite your
lets-get-drunk-on-the-plane, fiesta-all-night-long sort of
people. They are very quiet and often reserved, go to bed at ten'ish,
wake up early and spend days in silence reading books. Our living room
reminded me of a library. Incredibly enough, this holds true even for
the English we met.

** Deep Sleep in the Burg

But lets not get ahead of ourselves. Not to let our fans down, the
sleeping-monsters-couple did just that: we slept. We got to the lodge
at midday and we slept all day, and then all night, and then most of
the morning of the next day. We were exhausted.

We decided to use the four days in Jozzie to recover from the
onslaught of the previous days. Besides, not much can be done other
than going on organized trips (such as the Soweto tour). Everyone
keeps on telling you not to go out walking but to take the "shuttle"
instead. The "shuttle" is actually just a normal car driven on demand
by one of the guys from the lodge, so it would be better named "the
taxi", but there you go.

So, in four days, all we did was chat to people, go to the local
supermarket and mall and read books. On the subject of malls and
shops, I advise the men out there not to allow their women into
Mr. Price as it is an evil shop - days can be spent waiting for them
to come out... Mind you, Shahin was really good, didn't buy anything
and didn't take too long (and this was not written under duress!
ouch!).

We also watched the movie Beat the Drum, which is good but not
brilliant. In parts it is a bit like government propaganda against the
AIDS epidemic. On the whole its worth watching, in particular for
those less familiar with the African way of life such as
ourselves. There are many scenes from rural life which are quite
candid and the photography is great. The storyline is just a tad too
optimistic, everything turns out too all right for our liking -
certainly not at the same level of Tsotsi. But actually, surrounded by
so much talk of danger and violence, it was good to watch a feel-good
movie about the townships.

One thing we liked about hour five-hour stretch on the mall
(half-a-day outing...) was how normal and integrated it seemed. There
were lots of black people shopping, quite a few Asians, a few white
people too. It seemed as if the ever illusive black middle-class is
indeed forming in South-Africa.

** The Quiet American

One of the lads in Gemini was American. A good American (democrat),
quiet and not overly patriotic. He had just finished a teaching
stretch in Namibia, and was on his way to India. We had some great
chats about development but the one thing I remember best was his
joke:

Two UN members, an African and a Chinese meet at a conference. After
merrily chatting, the Chinese invites the African back to his
country. When the African visits, he's shown to an incredible
mansion. The African asks: "How do you manage to afford this on our
pauper UN wages?" to which the Chinese replies: "I'll let you in on a
secret. See that new bridge there? Ten percent of that went straight
into my pocket!". The African nods, amazed. Later on it is the
Chinese's turn to visit the African. When they get there, the Chinese
is even more surprised with the African's house! Its much bigger and
much posher! He asks, "how do you manage to have such a house?!". The
African takes him to the window and points "Do you see that massive
bridge over there?". The Chinese replies: "What bridge?". "Exactly",
replies the African. "100% of the money went straight into my pocket!"

This was funny. I pointed out that the same exact joke could be made
by replacing "African" with "American in Iraq" and "Chinese" with
"Indian". I liked the quiet American.

** The Spider Incident

One of the downsides of being surrounded by greenery is the amount of
African wild-life you're exposed to. For some reason, normal insects
just seem a lot more menacing in Africa. They're just bigger and
meaner. One day we got back to our room and I noticed a spider. It was
big, perhaps about twice the size of an English house spider, but,
much like it, it seemed pretty harmless and was quietly relaxing on
the wall. I dutyfuly pointed it out to Shahin.

Its pretty difficult to describe her reaction in words - I just wish I
had a camera. She reacted as if a hungry pack of lions was in our
room. First she was petrified, babbling something which I could not
quite understand; then she started shouting at me. Then I had to open
the door for her to run (and I mean RUN) outside. The funny thing was,
by the time I came back to the room to catch the spider it was gone! I
double-checked with the owner, who said the "big ones" are actually
harmless. However, he didn't fill me with confidence by talking about
the "little ones". These, apparently, are deadly. "But don't worry, if
you get bitten by those ones you'll die pretty quickly".

Eventually I got back to the room, found the spider and removed it. We
didn't sleep very comfortably though, thinking about the "little
ones".

Bafana Bafana

A quick word on football. South-Africans are actually less
enthusiastic about the World Cup than I thought they would be. I asked
a couple of locals, and they seemed a bit worried about it. First,
they think their national side, the Bafana Bafana, are not in their
best form. Some players such as Benny Mcarthy are seen as spoiled
brats that can't work hard for the team. Its amazing to think that
Angola has a small budget, very few players in European leagues (and
of those, most play in lower Portuguese divisions), almost no sporting
facilities and still manages to qualify to the World Cup and had
almost all of the supporters behind the team; whereas South-Africa has
got the best facilities, massive budget, most players play in Europe
and they still can't get their act together.

The second thing people seem really concerned about is security. They
think the government will have to do a huge effort to step up security
in order to host the event. Some people doubt the government is up to
the task.

Finally, there is the huge expenditure associated with it, which some
think would be better used elsewhere.

On the whole, the reactions where quite surprising. I was expecting
everyone to be really positive about the first ever World Cup on
African soil.

** Aaron

After a few days of peace and quiet, it was time to make a move. We
ended up not doing the Soweto trip this time round - it will have to
be done later on. One thing that is very annoying about Jo'burg, and
in fact spoils the town, is the constant need for supervision. You
just can't do anything that isn't organized, with a drop-off and
pick-up by a known good taxi driver. After a while you get this
feeling of being fenced in, and it is quite oppressive. On hindsight,
we could have probably ventured out during the day without too much
trouble - one of the guys, a Venezuelan backpacker, did go to New Town
and said he thoroughly enjoyed it. But these were our first few days
in Southern Africa; and since we were surrounded mainly by foreigners
and cautious lodge staff, we just didn't know where the limits
were. It seemed safer to err in the side of caution.

[[./gemini_aaron.jpg]]

Organizing the departure was interesting in itself. Gemini has this
one-man-band approach and all administrative tasks are done by one
chap, Aaron, who is a bit like a general manager of the place. Aaron
literally deals with pretty much everything, from booking people, to
collecting payments, to sorting out spiders in your room. We've seen
him at his desk from the first light of day till late at night. And
doing a bit of cleaning on the side too, on his spare moments. In
fact, as far as we could ascertain the only thing he doesn't do is
driving the shuttles, for which there are two or three drivers - who
seem to sit outside all day waiting for passengers. The actual owners
of the lodge, a nice white family, also seem to sit around relaxing
pretty much all the time. Unfortunately, because there are quite a few
people coming in and out, Aaron is always running from one place to
the next and its almost impossible to get his undivided attention. And
since we can't actually go anywhere without a car (which has to be
organized by Aaron for you), we couldn't do much without him
either. To get an idea, it could take an hour or two to get a Fanta
and it took us more than a day to buy a phonecard. While we were
waiting for the card, we got Aaron to ring the bus people for us. They
told us that it would be pretty difficult to get to Cape Town by bus
at that time. The holidays were just beginning and everyone was
heading down that way. Unfortunately this meant it would also be
pretty difficult to get to Windhoek by bus too as the buses have part
of the route in common, up til Uppington. In the end we got Aaron to
ring ComAir, and they got us a flight to Windhoek pretty much straight
away. This was a win as the flight is only a couple of hours instead
of the 26 hour bus journey. Although the buses are slightly less
expensive, once you factor in the extra days we would have to wait
round plus the time, flying is a much better deal.

So we got the plane and went off to Windhoek.

[[file:part_7.org][Forward to next chapter]]
[[file:index.org][Back to chapter index.]]
