#+title: Notebook of a Return to My Native Land - part 7
#+author: Marco Craveiro
#+options: num:nil author:nil toc:nil
#+bind: org-html-validation-link nil
#+HTML_HEAD: <link rel="stylesheet" href="../css/tufte.css" type="text/css" />

[[file:index.org][Back to chapter index.]]

Wednesday, December 13, 2006

* The Wind City

One thing that has to be said about the Namibians is that they are
really nice and friendly as a people. We met a couple on the plane, a
doctor and his wife, who, upon hearing that we were getting to
Windhoek on a Sunday without a pick-up prearranged, kindly offered to
take us to the town centre (they were extremely surprised that we had
decided to spend seven days in Windhoek and were convinced we'd get
bored after the first, as the entire city can be seen in one day).

Unlike South-Africa, the main concern in Namibia is not that you will
get mugged but that you'll get stuck somewhere. At worst you'll get
overcharged. As it happened, we got lucky and the forty-minute ride
into town was done in luxury and comfort. This was just as well as the
sun outside was baking hot. Windhoek is, at this time of the year,
much warmer than Jo'burg. One of the side-effects of the heat is that
landing in the capital is a troublesome affair, with the plane
jittering a lot. It feels as if you are in the most turbulent spot in
the sky, but with the land getting closer and closer.

After a pleasant car ride and a nice chat we got to the town
proper. We then found out that the map of Windhoek in Lonely Planet is
actually incorrect, and the street which shows up as Puccinni street
is actually called something else. Streets in Windhoek have funny
names. There is an entire block with streets named after classic music
composers such as Beethoven and Mozart. A lot of names are in German,
such as Beethovenstrasse. Namibia was a German colony a long time ago
but still maintains strong links with Germany. There are around 30,000
white Namibians of German descent and around 100,000 white Namibians
altogether; there are around 2 million people in total in the
country. Namibia is mostly desert and you really get that feeling as
you drive around. On a Sunday you scarcely see people.

Eventually we found Puccini street, which is about 15 minutes walk
from the centre of town. Puccini lodge is a nice place, but its a lot
more expensive than what we were paying in Jo'burg. In fact, that is
another trait of African backpacking: its a lot dearer than
Asia/Australia. In Jo'burg we were paying 200 rand for a double room,
which was already quite expensive; in Windhoek, Puccini charged 320
Namibian dollars. Namibian dollars are pegged to the rand, and
South-African rand is also legal tender in the country. This made our
life easier. Note though that Namibian dollars are not legal tender in
South-Africa, so one has to change all the money back to rands before
going back.

The staff at Puccini's is extremely friendly and the facilities are,
much like Gemini's, very tidy. It is slightly more upper market than
Gemini's and breakfast is included, but these features are not enough
to justify the additional 120 dollars charged. Most of the backpackers
at Puccini's were over forty and appeared to be German.

After a good sleep we ventured out in town. This was on the
Monday. Windhoek is an extremely quiet place. It is very hard to
describe how quiet this capital is. The main road is Independence
Avenue, and it runs for miles and miles on end. The part of it that
crosses the town centre has quite a few banks, offices and a few
flats. It also has quite a few shops of different kinds such as you'd
expect to find in any city centre. The surprising thing is their
number. I'd say Windhoek's centre is smaller than the Southampton's,
and Southampton is pretty small.

It doesn't take more than a few hours in the country to figure out
that Namibia is still very much divided along ethnic lines. We did get
this impression in South-Africa too (we didn't see any mixed couples
in Jo'burg although there were plenty of white and black people out
and about), but not to the extent you see in Namibia. Here, almost
without exception, all the businesses are owned by white Namibians and
almost without exception all employees are black. Almost all the nice
big SUVs and jeeps are owned by white Namibians and all the old
bangers are owned by black Namibians. In Windhoek you do see some
black people shopping in malls, but not to the extent you see in
South-Africa. So it seems that, for all of its faults, the Black
Empowerment and other programmes by the South-African government are
actually having some positive effects.

One peculiarity of shopping in Namibia is searching. Every time you
leave a shop, a security guard checks the contents of your bags
against your receipt. This is done to every single customer, black,
colored, white or asian, without fail, in any shop, so don't go losing
your receipt before you exit the store. And what's more, if you enter
the same shop twice, they'll re-check the bags. Best to be careful and
keep all receipts.

On the whole, just like with Jo'burg, Windhoek is an expensive
place. One can easily spend 140 to 160 dollars on a meal for two, and
most dishes cost around 40-60 dollars.

The other interesting thing, which also applies to South-Africa, is
the lack of African culture. You don't hear really loud African music
coming out of the cars of _either_ white or black Namibians. Everyone
seems to listen to either Hip-Hop or Pop/Rock music. Its really
strange. The music tastes are pretty much like Britain or Australia
and nothing at all like Gambia or the Portuguese speaking African
countries, where African music is everywhere and everyone, white or
black, listens to it. The only time when we heard a bit of Kizomba
(African music) was on the way to the airport when we were off to
Angola (and then, the driver was of Angolan descent).

** Katatura

One of our objectives was to see how black people live. You can easily
do that these days, since there are township excursions. This is also
one of the very few opportunities you get to be a patron of a black
business in Namibia. We took a two-hour trip into Katatura, known as
the Namibian Soweto. On the minibus with us was a German tourist, who
works as a journalist back home. The trip illustrated how deep and
recent the wounds are in Namibia. Katatura was a black-only township;
the colored township is up the road. Many houses in the townships
still have the original ethnic grouping, with the letters denoting the
origin: D for Damara, H for Herero, and so on. Not only there was a
clear division between whites, coloreds and blacks but there was a
fairly large rift between the different black ethnic groups.

[[./namibia_katatura.jpg]]

We went to a market in Katatura, where anything and everything gets
sold. It is actually very organised, and one gets the feeling that
perhaps more informal (read chaotic) markets do exist. There were many
Angolans selling their wares at the market as well as buying
things. They were easy to spot as they were all wearing all manner of
items with an Angolan flag, such as caps, shirts, bandanas.

Later on, it was amazing to sit down in a shebeen and have a drink,
overlooking the sea of zinc and corrugated iron expanding as far as
the eye could see. However, it must be said that the Namibian
government is doing somethings to alleviate the poverty in
Katatura. For instance, they have "street lighting", which is pretty
much like the lights of a football stadium. They also have many public
toilets and quite a few water taps available to the public. Some of
these have to be paid for but its infinitely better than say the
average favela in Rio or the musseques in Luanda.

The trip ended with a visit to a women's project, which focuses in
particular on disabled women. It was very nice to see "designer" items
being produced using very simple techniques, such as transforming used
glass bottles into beads.

** Swakopmund, or Little Germany

After a few days of relaxing in Windhoek we started to get restless
and it was time to do something different. So we decided to get a
minibus and travel to the coastal town of Swakopmound (called just
Swakop by the locals). For those not in the know, these "minibuses"
are pretty much souped up Toyota Hiace vans, with the cargo
compartment full of seats. Because in Namibia regulations are quite
strict and there are a lot of police check-points, the minibuses don't
get filled up as much as they do in other African countries such as
Gambia or Angola (the quiet American had told us though that the story
is somewhat different up north, but as far as Windhoek and Swakop go,
we could not complain too much of overcrowding).

We paid 80 bucks per person for the four-hour journey, which is a bit
of a bargain, considering the 40 minute ride to the airport costs 100
dollars per person in regular cabs. But even on the minibuses there
are traits of separation. There is a more organized minibus that
departs at set times (14:00 and 14:30 every day) and costs 120 dollars
for the trip. This bus is almost exclusively used by tourists and
white Namibians. The van is very nice looking, and it is much newer
than its black counterpart, with proper seats and everything. We were
happy to take the 80 dollar bus, not just because it is one of the few
chances you have to help the black economy but you also get there
faster as they constantly speed over 140 km/ph. Of course, you may not
get there at all, as the Namibian roads are known for their car
crashes.

We finally got to Swakop, and, for an extra fee, got taken straight to
our doorstep. We stayed at Desert Sky Backpackers lodge, for a modest
fee of 200 dollars a day. Its hard to describe this, but if we thought
Windhoek was quiet, nothing had prepared us for Swakop. After all,
everyone we spoke to said that Swakop is the tourist destination, all
Namibians go there for the summer. We were expecting some kind of
Benidorm sort of place. Instead, all we got were a few
fishermen. Literally. We walked the streets, up and down, and apart
form the local gardener here and there and a few tourists (and few is
the operative word here), there was no one at all in the streets. We
even bumped into our old acquaintance from the Katatura trip, the
German reporter. Imagine the odds, finding someone you know in
Namibia.

But it wasn't just in the quietness that Swakop resembles Windhoek,
its also a very divided place. In fact, more so than Windhoek,
even. We did not see a single person in the restaurants we went to
that was not white and the vast majority of the waiters were black (I
recall one white waiter, a teenager). It is actually a bit
uncomfortable to be the only non-white customers in a packed place in
Africa.

The other thing about Swakop is it is really cold place. I mean,
really. The funny thing is its around the corner from the desert (you
can walk there!) and five minutes from the beach, but man, that cold
wind chills your soul. It didn't help that we'd left all of our
luggage in Windhoek at Puccini's, including the fleeces, and we only
had t-shirts and shorts with us. The weather was good when the sun
came out, but very cold and windy otherwise. And the sea is extremely
cold. Its a bit like the sea in Porto, northern Portugal. Very, very
cold.

[[./namibia_desert.jpg]]

In Swakop we decided to start going on tours. We first did the
desert. This was a great experience. We had a couple of teenagers
doing the trip with us, on quad bikes. Shahin procrastinated as much
as possible, and was determined not to have to drive a quad bike by
herself, but she wanted to see the desert more than she feared
driving! Although I was not afraid of driving a quad bike, I got to
say I did feel the fear of god when we had to go down 45-degree dunes,
more than 50 meters high. Actually, even going up them was a
challenge. But it was great fun. And it was blistering cold. Luckily,
the guy from the tour lent me his fleece, or I would have frozen.

We also went on a dolphin and seal trip. This was also great fun. As
we got to the docks, there were three large dolphins swimming just by
the boat. Amazing. It was a good omen for the day, methinks, as we got
to see both big and small dolphins, and got into very close contact
with the seals. Its awfully hard to take pictures of dolphins, and I
think Shahin is very happy with her digital camera and the ability to
take many, many shots of empty sea without having to develop them.

[[./namibia_seal.jpg]]

After a couple of days in Swakop, people started arriving. It was
indeed as most people said, a rather popular place (at least in
Namibian terms), its just that we got there before everybody else
did. People started trickling in, and a few days later you could see a
lot of new faces walking about town. The beginning of the festive
season is marked with the Swakopmund Christmas Fair. This is a very
nice little market, with all sorts of stuff and more importantly, lots
of barbecued food, including boerwors. However, although this market
is extremely nice, there is something really eerie about being in the
middle of Africa surrounded by a traditionally German Christmas
market, listening to German or English Christmas carols and with most
people running the stalls being white Namibians and most visitors
being either white Namibians or white tourists. All the stalls ran by
black people were selling African art, and they were mostly stashed
away near the parking lot. There were a few food stalls run by
coloreds.

On our last day in Swakop we were lucky enough to meet Ewald and
Heicke. Ewald is Namibian of German (Austrian) descent and Heicke is
German, both teenagers. They were planning to drive down to Windhoek
the next day and offered to take us, sharing petrol costs. In
addition, they were also going to Walvis Bay. We joined them and
departed early in the morning. There's not much to be said about
Walvis Bay, other than "the flamingos outnumbered the people by 100 to
1" and the wind was even more constant than in Swakop. It is such a
desert place its unimaginable: the streets are empty on a Saturday
afternoon.

We then made our way back to Windhoek, spotting various different
animals such as the eland and a giraffe in a game park. Other than
that, the drive was quite uneventful.

[[file:part_8.org][Forward to next chapter]]
[[file:index.org][Back to chapter index.]]
