#+title: Kizua Mwangola: Part 9: Deadly Mambas
#+author: Marco Craveiro
#+options: num:nil author:nil toc:nil
#+bind: org-html-validation-link nil

[[file:index.org][Back to chapter index.]]

Saturday, January 16, 2010

So, the entertainment of the day proved to be entertaining. First
course was a pleasing [[http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport2/hi/football/africa/8462601.stm][Nigeria v Benin]], with the Super Eagles
displaying the usual not-so-super form. Somehow they managed to scrape
a win with a penalty that didn't look that obvious to me --- but then
again, that's the biggest problem with live games: no replays. Benin
looked good though, or maybe it just was a weak Nigeria that made them
look so good. Second course was the very much waited [[http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport2/hi/football/africa/8462293.stm][Mozambican mambas
against Egypt]]. If Egypt had a great support from the public against
Nigeria, this time they felt the might of 30-odd thousand Benguelans
against them. I mean, jeez, we even sang _Mozambican_ songs. This was
better support than they would have in Maputo, I tell you.

#+caption: Mozambique v Egypt, Benguela. (c) Shahinara Craveiro
[[../assets/images/IMG_1387.JPG]]

The first half was exciting, mainly because Egypt didn't quite manage
to score, but Mozambique did make a few interesting moves. The crowed
got to the interval screaming very loudly every time Mozambique had
the ball in Egypt's half (my own voice is almost gone). It was clear
that the Mambas were feeling the pressure to score, so they decided to
let loose and make the deadly mamba venom felt. Rather unfortunately,
the target of all of that uncontrolled aggression was themselves, with
an own goal starting the second half. Or was this the old
score-an-own-goal-to-distract-them, a strategy tried and tested on the
previous game against Benin? If it was, it didn't work.

Egypt didn't really need the extra help --- but didn't deny it either
--- and looked very much the part of champions-waiting-for-a-crown. In
some ways, watching Egypt play is not that dissimilar to watching a
well drilled army fighting against a bunch of territorial
reserves. Its not that they do anything particularly flashy, or flairy
or crowd-pleasing; they are just a really well oiled, well drilled
machine, where everyone knows their position, everyone knows who
they're covering, everyone knows where they should be when attacking
and everyone --- and I mean _everyone_ --- knows how time waste when
they're winning. Its amazing. The only chances they give away, other
than the rare defence mistake, are free-kicks and shots from far away
--- and Mozambique never looked dangerous in either of these.

------

If you're in Angola you've seen the "Miudo" (kid) TV ad, featuring
Angola's captain Kali and the "Miudo". Well, we thought we'd find our
Miudo too and gave away a bunch of tickets to kids waiting outside the
stadium --- hey, at 500 Akz a pop one can just about afford the
luxury. One of them we decided to drag with us, and he reluctantly
accepted or invitation. The miudo was pretty quiet. In fact, he didn't
say a single word during both games, communicating only by
affirmatively shaking his head to our inquisitive questions: do you
want some juice? are you enjoying the game? do you want a cap? He then
quietly disappeared minutes before the end of the second game. He
seemed amazed with the big stadium though.


#+caption: The "Miudo" (c) Shahinara Craveiro
[[../assets/images/miudo.JPG]]

------

On our way back we decided to avoid the crows at the parking lot's
exit, taking instead some really alternative routes. This involved
trekking through some very dark bairros, places where the electricity
hasn't got to (nor will it) and where people can't afford generators
either. Goes to say a lot about safety in this country when you can
ride the back of a pick-up truck across the "dangerous" bairros,
chatting to the people as you go along without worrying about being
mugged.

------

Shahin has decided to busy herself by becoming a cook; as I write this
she's serving Pizzas to starving journalists from many different
countries.

| [[file:part_8.org][Back to previous chapter]] | [[file:index.org][Back to chapter index.]] | [[file:part_10.org][Forward to next chapter]] |
